---
layout: single-post
title: Why I Run
---

Javascript wunderkind Alex MacCaw recently wrote a short piece entitled [‘Exercise & Programming’](http://blog.alexmaccaw.com/exercise), which makes the case that programmers invest a huge amount of time and effort in expanding their skills, but completely neglect the body—and by extension, the brain’s health, and very ability to absorb and use those skills.

>Our bodies are not just some vehicle to get our brains between meetings and keyboards. Like it or not, our brains are deeply tied to the performance of our bodies. This sedentary lifestyle we've become accustomed to has severe implications on our performance as programmers. <cite>—Alex MacCaw, <a href="http://blog.alexmaccaw.com/exercise" title="Exercise &amp; Programming">Exercise &amp; Programming</a></cite>

I started running about a year ago, as part of an effort to offset the [negative impact of sitting all day at work](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/17/magazine/mag-17sitting-t.html), and it’s been one fo the best gifts I’ve given myself in years. I’m going to discuss some of the benefits it‘s had on my work and life. I’ll follow this post up with a discussion of my approach to running, how I got past some unexpected hurdles, and a few gotchas I encountered along the way.

## Routine and Lifestyle Moderation

When I first became a freelance designer/developer, I was working and studying like mad, and my lifestyle was a shambles. I developed insomnia, and had a fractured sleep schedule, sleeping in bursts and working excessive hours. I smoked and drank too much, and generally looked and felt like hell.

In the past few years, I’ve managed to develop a routine and normal sleeping patterns, relying on blocks of uninterrupted work hours and meals to structure my day.

In the past year, however, I’ve noticed that running has further cemented my routine, and rounded off the rough edges a bit. No more staying up late with that one last bourbon, trying to take the edge off a frustrating day—I’m already focused on getting up on 7:30am the next day and hitting my circuit before it gets too hot.

## Good for the Brain

MacCaw doesn’t really talk too much about the direct benefits of exercise on the brain, and I don’t have much insight either—the only indication I’m aware of is that work has improved vastly in the past year, although there are lots of other factors there (a general trend towards designers being more valued in the development of products and web services, some [fantastic clients](http://pixelunion.net), and so on).

However, I can point to a couple of articles recently published by the NY Times—‘[How Exercise Fuels the Brain](http://well.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/02/22/how-exercise-fuels-the-brain/)’ discusses some research pointing to the fact that exercise directly increases to the brain’s capacity to store glycogen (fuel)—effectively the brain carbo-loads, and has more fuel to work with, if you exercise regularly.

‘[How Exercise Could Lead to a Better Brain](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/22/magazine/how-exercise-could-lead-to-a-better-brain.html?_r=1&pagewanted=all)‘ goes into detail about a body of research showing that exercise can slow or reverse the natural degradation of the brain that occurs with age.

## Working out Frustrations

It’s not just that I’m skipping that nightcap now—I often don’t need it. Running really helps me get past any frustrations with client projects.

You know the drill. A client comes back saying “I love this mockup, but can we just change this—and this, and that…”, and what you thought was a great design solution needs to be entirely reconsidered.

Inevitably, once I get past my initial annoyance, I realize that the client’s feedback has actually provided me with valuable information and constraints, and the result is always better. However, I still need to get past that annoyance phase, and running helps expedite this.

In these situations, I often clock my best paces and longest runs, because I’m distracted, and slowly untangling the frustrated responses and arguments in my head from the emotions. Eventually, my mind is clear, the endorphins are kicking in, and I’m unblocked.

## Mental and Emotional Levelness

I’ve struggled a bit with anxiety, even the occasional bout of depression. I am flat-out amazed at the effect that running has on my attitude and emotions—it’s just fantastically levelling.

The biggest indication of this comes on rest days, especially if strain or injury has me taking a few days off in a row. There’s a creeping return to a negativity and listelessness that feels both familiar and unwelcome, and I can’t believe that used to be my everyday state.

## Endorphins!

Endorphins are a big part of the mental levelness I mentioned above, but they warrant their own mention. When recently I completed a relatively long run of 16K, and slowed down to a cool-down walk, it felt like I’d done heroin—I was floating down the street. I felt like the old blind man that Amélie helps across the street. Amazing.

## The Runner’s High

This is maybe the biggest one for me, and the most difficult to attain. There comes a point, occasionally, when all the factors of your run come together—no pain or discomfort, not too much humidity, not too thirsty, etc—when the running is so effortless that you feel disembodied, like you’re zooming down the street or trail in some kind of astral projection, with endorphins flashing across your brain like an electrical storm. It’s otherworldly. And it’s worth the 19 dull runs you have to slog through until it happens again.

## Personal Analytics

I’m fascinated with personal analytics, and love tracking and  seeing everything from trends in my music listening habits on [Rdio](http://rdio.com) to the frequency with which I annotate texts in [Readmill](http://readmill.comj).

Running is particularly fun and rewarding to track, and for a while I was using both [Runkeeper](http://runkeeper.com) and [Nike Plus](http://nikeplus) simultaneously (I’ve since committed to the latter). Tracking trends in pace, elevation and heart rate provides a depth and richness to the experience that I love, and it really does motivate you beat personal records, and slowly develop in a way that’s structured and safe. I also really trust the numbers to help keep me injury free.

## Listening to the Body

Of course, the most important way to avoid injury, aside from sticking to an established and reliable training plan, is to listen to your body. I’ve become an expert at which pains and aches mean what where, and when I need to rest more, use ice, or add different stretches to my cool down.

This awareness is probably the driving force behind other chnages in my lifestyle as well—for instance, I’m more aware of what glycogen overload feels like when I eat too much sugary food at once, or when I’m dehydrated or in need or protein.

## Try it Yourself

Running has had a number of very positive effects on my life, and—as you can see—not just in the obvious ways that one would expect. While running may not be the sport for you, I’d strongly urge you incorporate some kind of exercise into your life, if you don’t already. Especially if you work in a field that requires a lot of mental acuity and stamina—you’ll be amazed at the difference.
